While Guthix Sleeps
From Old School RuneScape Wiki
Jump to navigation Jump to search

               This quest has a quick guide.
               It briefly summarises the steps needed to complete the quest.

                                                                                          While Guthix Sleeps (#165)




                                             Released                                           10 July 2024 (Update)
                                            Also called                                         WGS
                                             Members                                            Yes
                                           Quest series                                         Mahjarrat, #15
                                         Lead developer(s)                                      Mod Ed




While Guthix Sleeps is a grandmaster quest that was backported from its original release in 2008, and was originally made as a sequel toTemple of Ikov. Changes were made upon its release to Old School
RuneScape to maintain the integrity of modern quests and account for continuity deviations from the originalMahjarrat storyline.

Contents
     1 Details
     2 The Crux Eqal
     3 Monitoring Movario
           3.1 Bravo, Broav!
           3.2 Movario's Base
           3.3 Weight and see
     4 Forming a fellowship
           4.1 The Mahjarrat's mercenaries
           4.2 Telling the truth
           4.3 Amassing the masters
     5 The Dark Squall
           5.1 Scuffle with Surok
           5.2 Wrath of Lucien
     6 Into the Chasm
           6.1 Rock bottom
           6.2 Trading Orbs For Blocks, Blocks for Access
           6.3 Dolmens, doors, and druids
                 6.3.1 Acquiring Ingredients
                        6.3.1.1 Recharging Pouches
                        6.3.1.2 Acquiring Dolmens
     7 The Stone of Jas
           7.1 Balancing act
           7.2 Facing your demons
           7.3 The story kin-tinues
     8 Rewards
     9 Transcript
      10 Music
      11 Gallery
      12 Changes
      13 Developers
      14 Historical
      15 Trivia

Details
[edit | edit source]
   Start point      Speak to Ivy Sophista in Taverley. Show on map
     Official
                 Grandmaster
   difficulty
 Official length Very Long
                 This Grandmaster quest sees you continue the Mahjarrat storyline, hunting down one of the most powerful artefacts in existence while ensuring it doesn't fall into the wrong hands.

                   This artefact is known by many names – most recently, the Stone of Jas. It has shaped the course of Gielinor’s history, from the creation of the first Runes to the fall of Zaros. It was last seen at
                   the devastating end of the God Wars, when Zamorak, in a fit of rage, used it to reduce the land of Forinthry to the Wilderness we know today.

  Description      Angered by Zamorak’s actions, Guthix rose from his age-long slumber and banished the gods. He hid the Stone of Jas far underground, where it could never disturb the balance again...

                   But while Guthix sleeps, nefarious forces have been gathering: the Mahjarrat. Shaped by war and deadly ritual, their plans for the Stone can only lead to catastrophe.

                   Facing off against the Mahjarrat is nothing new for dedicated adventurers – at every turn, they seem to grow in power and wage war against the people of Gielinor. In their last attempt, we saw
                   them set out to tear Varrock apart with an undead army in Defender of Varrock. What are they plotting now?

                            180 Quest points
                                           [not boostable] [required to start]
                             72 Thieving
                                      [not boostable]
                             67 Magic
                                        [not boostable] [required to start]
                             66 Agility [not boostable] [required to start]
                             65 Farming
                             65 Herblore [not boostable]
                                        [not boostable] [required to start]
                            62 Hunter
                        Ability to enter the Warriors' Guild (the sum of your Attack and Strength must be at or above 130; OR                , OR                   [not boostable]
                                                                                                                                    99 Attack        99 Strength)
                        Completion of the following quests:
                               Defender of Varrock
                                     Shield of Arrav
                                     Temple of Ikov
                                     Below Ice Mountain
                                     Family Crest
                                     What Lies Below
                                     Romeo & Juliet
                                     Demon Slayer
                                     Garden of Tranquillity
                                           Creature of Fenkenstrain
                                                  Priest in Peril
                                                  The Restless Ghost
                               The Path of Glouphrie
                                     The Eyes of Glouphrie
                                           The Grand Tree
                                     Waterfall Quest
                                     Tree Gnome Village
                               Fight Arena
 Requirements                  Dream Mentor
                                     Eadgar's Ruse
                                           Druidic Ritual
                                           Troll Stronghold
                                                  Death Plateau
                                     Lunar Diplomacy
                                           The Fremennik Trials
                                           Lost City
                                           Rune Mysteries
                                           Shilo Village
                                                  Jungle Potion
                               The Hand in the Sand
                               Wanted!
                                     Recruitment Drive
                                           Black Knights' Fortress
                                           Druidic Ritual
                                     The Lost Tribe
                                           Goblin Diplomacy
                               Temple of the Eye
                                     Enter the Abyss
                                           Rune Mysteries
                               Tears of Guthix
                               Nature Spirit
                                     Priest in Peril
                                     The Restless Ghost
                               A Tail of Two Cats
                                     Icthlarin's Little Helper
                                           Gertrude's Cat



                        Ring of charos(a) or 500 coins
                        Knife
                        Seed dibber (only if Barbarian Farming Training has not been completed)
                        Lantern lens
                        Unpowered orb
                        Bronze med helm
                        Iron chainbody
                        Sapphire lantern
                        Runes to cast the NPC Contact spell four times (8 air runes, 4 astral rune, 4 cosmic rune)
                        Runes for any charge orb spell (30 runes of a chosen element and 3cosmic runes)
                        Equipment for two different combat styles
 Items required         Runes for the following spells: multiple casts of all four elemental spells,Snare/Entangle, Weaken/Enfeeble, Telekinetic Grab, and Low/High Level Alchemy; (Air, Water, Earth, Fire,
                        Body/Soul, Nature, Law, and the highest of Mind/Chaos/Death/Blood/Wrath that you can use to cast all four elemental spells)

                   Obtainable during quest:

                        Mort myre fungus
                        1 log of any type except redwood (you can obtain one using a bronze axe next to theHunting Expert, but you must not already have an axe in your inventory (aZombie axe counts, even
                        though it can not be used to cut down trees)
                        Pink dye (or 20 coins)
                        Snapdragon seed
                        Papyrus and charcoal
                        Restore potion
                        One of each of the following runes:air, water, earth, fire, mind, law, death
                           95 Combat level
                        Taverley teleport
                        Access to fairy rings
Recommended             Feldip hills teleport
                        Ardougne Cloak 1 or greater
                        Multiple Falador Teleports, or a Ring of returning with your respawn set inFalador
                        Antipoison or items that can cure poison


                        2 Assassins (level 167)
                        2 Mercenary axemen (level 131)
                        Mercenary mage (level 112)
   Enemies to
                        3 Elite Black Knights (level 138)
     defeat
                        Surok Magis (level 265)
                        Balance Elemental (level 524)
                        2 Tormented Demons (level 450)


 League notes Impossible to complete. Tormented Demons will be accessible without needing to start or complete the quest, meaning the only requirement is aSapphire Lantern.



The Crux Eqal
[edit | edit source]
Items recommended: Antipoison and combat equipment to defeat two level 167 Assassins.




The player may receive an Armadyl communiqué from a Guardian of Armadyl during gameplay, but is not necessary to start the quest. Players may choose to wait and receive it if they wish to acquire the item.

Speak to Ivy Sophista at Taverley to begin the quest. She is found in the same building that houses thecrystal chest. She will tell you about the danger that Lucien poses, and thus refers you to Thaerisk, as what
he is going to say requires the utmost secrecy. Head up the ladder and talk to Thaerisk, who will continue to talk about Lucien, the evil Mahjarrat has become even more powerful since acquiring theStaff of
Armadyl.




      Fending off assassins with Thaerisk.

As Thaerisk speaks, the two of you will be attacked byassassins disguised as druids; one will focus on Thaerisk, and the other will attack you. The assassins attack with ranged, and every so often, will yell
 Now! , launching a glowing arrow at the player. Shortly after this arrow lands, the other assassin will sayNothing personal, adventurer! and attack once with a dragon dagger special attack, which can hit at
least 53 damage if not protected against. Swap to Protect from Melee after the arrow lands, and then focus back on the assassin. You do not have to worry about Thaerisk; he cannot die in this encounter, and his
Earth Blast spells can easily fend off the assassin focused on him.

Speak with Thaerisk again to learn that many operatives of theCrux Eqal—followers of Guthix who play an active part in combating threats to Gielinor— have allied with theGuardians of Armadyl in response to
attacks from Lucien's agents. Thaerisk will reveal that they have reached out to the Temple Knights, believing it necessary to unite followers of different gods to oppose Lucien.

He will suggest that players look for a researcher namedMovario, who he suspects stole the Staff of Armadyl. Their best lead so far is that he hired a member of the Khazard Army namedDarve to act as a
bodyguard, and that the Fight Arena is a good place to start looking.

Monitoring Movario
[edit | edit source]

Bravo, Broav!

[edit | edit source]
Items needed: 500 coins or ring of Charos(a), log, knife
Items recommended: Ardougne Cloak 1 or greater, Feldip hills teleport or Fairy ring access, 1 inventory space for a free Mort Myre Fungus




      The location of the launderer in the Fight Arena

Head to the Fight Arena, and speak to the Khazard Launderer two buildings north of the Fight Arena Bar. This is just south-west of the Ardougne Monastery teleport (accessed with the Ardougne cloak 1 or
greater). Speak to the launderer regarding Movario. He will be skeptical to give information, so either charm him with the ring of Charos(a), or bribe him with 500 coins. He will tell you that he doesn't know where
Movario lives, but will mention that he does have a dirty shirt that is too damaged to be washed, and will give the shirt to you. He will also mention that you should speak to thehunting expert at Feldip Hills if you
want to catch down a broav of your own to track Movario to his base.




      A wild broav appeared!

Make your way to the Feldip Hunter area (Feldip hills teleport is the quickest method, or fairy ring code AKS) and seek out the hunting expert in a wooden building, south-west of the fairy ring.Note that the other
hunting expert outside the red chinchompa hunting ground entrance is not the correct expert; the Hunter Tutor icon found on theminimap marks the correct tutor's location.

Ask her about catching broavs, and she will offer to train one for you if you bring her one. She will provide you with amort myre fungus as bait; bring this to the trap west of her location, and set up apitfall trap
(requiring a knife and logs—logs can be acquired from nearby jungle trees). After setting up the trap, use the fungus on it to bait it, and wait for a wild broav to appear and fall inside. Be careful not to click too
quickly on the trap after the broav falls in as it's possible to overwrite the broav with a new trap. This will only occur if the player has an additional set of logs and mort myre fungus.

Once you have an unconscious broav, bring it back to the hunting expert. Ask the hunting expert to train your newly acquired broav.

Movario's Base

[edit | edit source]
Items needed: Dirty shirt, broav, 1 water rune, 1 fire rune, 1 earth rune, 1 air rune, 1 mind rune, 5 free inventory spaces
Items recommended: Coal bag, log basket, food
      Using Movario's dirty shirt on the broav.




      Pay attention to the word "PROHIBITED" (different for all players) to determine blast colour configuration.

After speaking to the hunting expert, head to thebattlefield and enter the ruined building with a broken table near theCarnillean mansion (Show map). Once here, drop the broav, then use the shirt on it. Follow
the broav to a broken table; once the broav squeals, the broken table can be searched, revealing a trapdoor underneath it. Open the trapdoor to enter Movario's base. Upon entering the base, you will be attacked
by melee-using Elite Khazard Guards as soon as you open the door. When ready, make your way to the north-west area shaped like a hook on the minimap. At the northern end is an open chest; search it to
obtain a number of runes. Climb down the stairs, where you find yourself in a room with an old battered door in the way. Note that all teleportation from this point onward is blocked. Right-click inspect the door, and
pay close attention to the word "PROHIBITED;" one of the letters is stylised after a rune, which is the rune you must use to open the door. This rune is different for every player.

Using the incorrect rune on the door will result in an unblockable blast of magic fired at you, dealing 20+ damage. The colour of the blast indicates the correct rune that should have been used.




      The broav tracking down Movario's scent.

Symbol Letter Rune Blast colour
             O            Purple

             H            Green

             E            White

             E             Red

             D             Blue




      A room full of bookcases with wires running between them.

Upon using the correct rune, proceed through the door. Note that you cannot enter if you weigh less than 2 kg, so unequip anyweight-reducing clothing you may be wearing before moving forward.

As you enter the room, a section of floor will sink slightly under your weight. In this room, filled with bookcases with wires running between them, the objective is to open the caged door by diverting power from the
gates to the wires. Begin by searching the bookcases until the chatbox indicates that you hear a click as you pull a lever. From that initial bookcase, follow the floor wires that illuminate and search the subsequent
bookcase, continuing to do so until the chatbox indicates that the electric gate is deactivated. This message indicates the gate can now be safely opened. Enter the gate, and then search the spiral staircase and
disable the trap, then climb it to access Movario's study.




      A player in Movario's study.

In the study, search the desk to obtain Movario's notes (volume 1), and click through all pages. Next, pick up thewaste-paper basket next to the desk, and search it for aruby key. Use this key on the northernmost
bookcase to the west to access a rising staircase; this has no traps, so proceed upstairs.

Search the bed to uncover a bed chest beneath it, then use the ruby key on the chest to unlock it. Right-click "search" the bed chest (choosing "Open" will trigger a trap dealing 18+ damage). Then, open the
chest and search the open chest for Movario's notes (volume 2). Read it, and do not discard them, as you must give them to Thaerisk later on.

Weight and see

[edit | edit source]

Head back downstairs to the study. At the southern side of the room, inspect the painting on the wall and pull the lever to reveal an entrance to a hidden room. Cross over the broken wall, then search the drawers
to obtain some notes on pressure. Read it, then look at the pressure gauge, which displays a number in the unit of "tickits;" this value represents the sum of the weight of the statue, as well as that of any objects
on top of it. Exiting the room requires the pressure gauge to read the same value as the weight indicated in your Equipment Stats interface.




      The hidden room beyond the painting in Movario's study.
If your mass is different than the value of tickits indicated by the pressure gauge, you must do one of two things. Both require you to take weights from the pile of weights nearby, where there are three sizes
available: 1kg, 2kg, and 5kg.

      If your mass is lower than the value from the pressure gauge you musttake and carry enough weights from the pile to increase your weights to match the pressure gauge's value.
      If your mass is higher, you must take enough weights from the pile andput them on the statue to the north.

For example, if you weigh 41 kg, and the pressure gauge reads 11 tickits, you must put 30 kg on the statue (11 + 30 = 41). If you weigh 29 kg and the pressure gauge reads 31 tickits, you must pick up 2 kg from
the weight pile and keep it in your inventory (31 - 29 = 2).

Once your weight and the reading on the pressure gauge are equal, the eastern door will unlock, allowing you to leave via teleportation.

If you made a mistake, a small contraption by the door will count down from three, indicating the amount of tries the player has before triggering a trap. If the contraption counts down to zero, it will spray gas and
throw the player into a jail room, confiscating Movario's notes. Players may simply retrace their steps to get them back.

Note: While not necessary for quest completion, there is a tunnel in the south-west corner of the study. Entering the tunnel brings you to a room where you can loot 100death runes, 100 fire runes, 100 coal, and
100 magic logs. The fastest way to leave with the resources is to attempt to open the eastern door with the wrong weight on the scale, in order to be kicked out of the base. Note that the coal and magic logs are
looted in unnoted form, so bringing a coal bag and log basket will be advantageous for those seeking to reduce trips back and forth. Movario's notes will still be confiscated even if they are in the bank, so it is
advised to hand them in to Thaerisk first before going back and looting the base.

Forming a fellowship
[edit | edit source]
Items needed: Movario's notes (volume 1), Movario's notes (volume 2), lantern lens, 20 coins for pink dye from Betty, a snapdragon seed (Thaerisk provides one for free), seed dibber (if the player hasn't
completed the Farming part of Barbarian Training), runes to cast the NPC Contact spell four times (8 air runes, 4 astral runes, 4 cosmic runes)
Items recommended: Combat equipment, fairy ring access, Taverley teleport, multiple teleports to Falador, a teleport to the Warrior's Guild (Strength Cape, Combat bracelet or Games necklace)

The Mahjarrat's mercenaries

[edit | edit source]

Head back to Thaerisk at Taverley and show him the notes you stole from Movario's base. He will then tell you that in your absence, the Crux Eqal have managed to secure the Temple Knights as allies, and that
a base of operations is being established at the White Knights' Castle. Additionally, they have lost contact with Idria and the Guardians of Armadyl; as such, Thaerisk will ask that you head toMcGrubor's Wood to
check up on them.




      Fending off Lucien's mercenaries.

The quickest way to reach McGrubor's Wood is via fairy ring (code ALS). Once there, head to the building by way of theloose railing to the east, where a cutscene begins in which Lucien's mercenaries will attack
the Guardians of Armadyl. Kill the two mercenary axemen, then finish off the mercenary mage; when the mage teleports away at low health, you can proceed to speak to Idria, whom you will inform of the Crux
Eqal moving their base of operations to the White Knights' Castle. Alternatively, wait for Idria to kill all of them.

Telling the truth

[edit | edit source]

Head to the Falador castle and head to the round table on the ground floor east side, where you will meetAkrisae along with Thaerisk and Idria. Despite their differing beliefs, they agree that Lucien poses a threat
and that they all must work together to stop him. Based on Movario's notes, they will conclude that he is looking for the Stone of Jas, an extremely powerful artefact of ancient origin. They will add that the spies
Lucien sent to monitor Movario could be captured for interrogation, and that they have an improved version of a truth serum to use on them. Akrisae will give you a teleorb that you must plant on a spy, which will
then teleport the spy into the jail cell once the corresponding teleport spell is cast.




      Thaerisk instructs a druid to serve the spy some "juice".

In Draynor Village, you will find a number of shady strangers and suspicious outsiders. Use the teleorb on any of them.Make sure to avoid talking to the stranger first, as you may be unable to plant the orb
on them for some time. Note that it is possible to fail, causing you to take a small amount of damage. Once you've succeeded, make your way back to White Knights' Castle and speak to Akrisae, who will
forcefully teleport the spy into the cell.

A cutscene will play in which a druid attempts to coax the spy into drinking the truth serum, but the spy will kick them, knocking him out and breaking the "juice." You will now need to make another one on behalf
of Thaerisk, who tells you that the enhanced serum uses an enriched snapdragon, directs you to Betty in Port Sarim, and offers a teleport to get there.




      Enriching the snapdragon seed at Betty's shop.

Before being teleported, make sure you have a lantern lens and 20 coins. Thaerisk will also give the player a free snapdragon seed if they choose to take it.

When ready, accept Thaerisk's teleport. Talk to Betty and purchase thepink dye from her, then use it on the lantern lens to obtain arose-tinted lens. Next, speak to her again, asking about enriching snapdragon
seeds. She will realise you are working with Thaerisk, since she is aware only he would need it, but willing to help nonetheless.

To enrich the seed, the player needs to use the tinted lens on the shop counter whilst standing at the doorway. Pick up theenriched snapdragon seed and return to Thaerisk in the White Knights' Castle.

Amassing the masters

[edit | edit source]

With the seed in tow, Thaerisk will instruct you to plant the enriched seed in a special patch on top of the castle. Climb up the
                                                                                                                                western stairs to the top of the castle (three floors up), then plant the seed in the
patch (the seed cannot become diseased). As the herb grows, speak to Idria, who will ask that you assemble a small task force to take on Lucien alongside you, all of which can be recruited via NPC Contact:

      Turael - in Burthorpe
      Mazchna - in Canifis
      Duradel - in Shilo Village, reached by climbing the ladder in the fishing shop.
      Cyrisus - cast NPC Contact and select him in the interface

The player can visit each master in person, but it is recommended to useNPC Contact instead, since Cyrisus requires the spell to be contacted anyway. Talk to them about Lucien, and they will agree to help.

Once all four heroes are recruited, the herb will have finished growing, so return to the patch and harvest anenriched snapdragon. Head back down to Thaerisk, who he will give you a regulartruth serum; use the
enriched snapdragon on it to create the super truth serum.

If you don't already have a charcoal and papyrus, they can be obtained in the drawers just south of the jail cell next to the Suit of Armour. With the super truth serum, go inside the jail cell. The stranger will refuse
to talk, so you will threaten him instead, causing him to quickly comply and consume the serum. He will reveal that he takes orders from a man named the Dark Squall, and then describe Squall's appearance. You
will automatically make a suspect sketch.

Give the sketch to Idria, who will tell you that she will get them copied for wanted posters and passed around to the Temple Knight's spies. In the meantime, she will ask that you recruit
                                                                                                                                                                                         Ghommal, Harrallak
Menarous, and Sloane, who can all be found in theWarriors' Guild. Ghommal and Harrallak can be found right by the guild's entrance, whilst Sloane can be found one floor above.

Return to Akrisae, who has potential new developments regarding theDark Squall. However, the group is interrupted by the appearance ofHazelmere, who will reveal to you that the vision he told you about refers
to Lucien, and offers his assistance.




     The alliance headquartered
     within White Knights' Castle.




     Hazelmere arrives to offer his
     assistance to the alliance.




     The band of heroes, gathered
     together within White Knights'
     Castle.

The Dark Squall
[edit | edit source]
Items needed: 9 free inventory spaces, bronze med helm and iron chainbody (or a black armour set), an unpowered orb and runes for any charge orb spell (standard spellbook is required), and combat equipment
for two combat styles (magic recommended)
Items recommended: Emergency teleport, stamina potion, prayer potion, food




     A map of the Black Knight Catacombs.

Speak to Akrisae, who tells you that the Dark Squall has been spotted near theBlack Knights' Fortress. Akrisae sent his operative Silif to scout the area, whose last report is that he had entered the fortress and
presumably followed Dark Squall inside. You will be asked to investigate this further in case Silif is in trouble.

Enter the fortress with your disguise of choice (you may unequip it after entering), then push the hidden wall directly ahead and climb down the ladder. Head south towards the tiled flooring, and inspect the green
carved tile with an orb symbol on it. Cast any charged orb spell on it, and it will transform into a trapdoor; climb down to enter the Black Knight Catacombs.

The Catacombs is full of elite Kinshra in the form of Elite Black Knights, Elite Dark Warriors, Elite Dark Mages, and Elite Dark Rangers. They are all aggressive unless the player is wearing elite black armour or
the Dark Squall robes, and utilise protection prayers when fought. While this is not unlimited, it is still recommended to bring at least two combat styles to have maximum uptime while fighting them.




     Players can safely kill elite black knights just past the broken bridge with Protect from Melee.

After passing the broken bridge, you will be surrounded by elite dark warriors and one elite black knight, allowing you to prayProtect from Melee without any mages and rangers attacking. Kill the elite black knight
here until you have a full set of elite black armour.

Making sure to wear the armour beforehand, make your way north-east and climb up the wall. Run all the way north-west to a set of doors.

Recommended: Enter the western door to unlock a shortcut within the catacombs.
     The locations of various objects in the Dark Squall's inner base.

With 9 free inventory spaces, enter the northern door and search:1 Desk, 1 Key Rack, 2 Tables, and 2 Wardrobes to obtain the items required for Silif's rescue:

     a second set of elite black armour
     the cell key
     a lobster
           Note: any piece of food will work[confirmation needed]
     the restore potion
           the Dark Squall robes
                  Note: The robes will be used as your disguise from here on out, including entering the Black Knights' Fortress again in case you teleport out during the fight.

If you have an additional three inventory spaces, take thestrange teleorb alongside the death and law rune; otherwise, you can take them later. Head back out through the southern door, then use the nearest
eastern path to reach the jail cells, where you will find Silif in the northernmost cell. Open the gate, then use the lobster (or other food item if you lost the lobster since looting it) and restore potion on him to help
him recover. Talk to him again and ask if he has a plan, and he will tell you that he needs to access the inner base to view the Dark Squall's maps and plans, which he can memorise and duplicate once he leaves.
You will automatically give him the second set of elite black armour at the end of this dialogue, and he will begin to follow you.

Return to the room with the desks and wardrobes, and lead Silif to themap board by the southern wall. While he studies the maps, he will ask that you find theDark Squall and plant a teleorb on him. It is
recommended that players now bank and regear appropriately, as there will be a magic-based boss fight coming up, explained below.

Scuffle with Surok

[edit | edit source]
Items needed: One free inventory slot (to pick up lit explosive), Dark Squall's robes, teleorb, food, combat equipment for standard magic (powered staves will not work), and runes for the following spells: multiple
casts of all four elemental spells, Snare/Entangle, Weaken/Enfeeble, Telekinetic Grab, and Low/High Level Alchemy; as such, you will need Air, Water, Earth, Fire, Body/Soul, Nature, Law, and the highest of
Mind/Chaos/Death/Blood/Wrath that you can use to cast all four elemental spells).

Make your way back to the inner base, and attempt to climb the ladder on the eastern side of the room (while wearing the Dark Squall's Robes). An Elite Black Knight will stop you, but your disguised self will fool
him, scolding him for his incompetence and ordering him to do push-ups. A cutscene will then ensue where you stumble into the real Dark Squall. He will be revealed to beSurok Magis, who escaped during the
chaos in Defender of Varrock.

Surok has 450 hitpoints, attacks with Fire Surge, and has both Protect from Melee and Protect from Missiles simultaneously active. It is therefore necessary to attack with magic. PrayProtect from Magic, as his
attacks can hit over 40 without it, but significantly less with the prayer active. Surok is notably immune to damage from powered staves, thus the player must use combat spells in order to damage him. He is also
immune to the sapping effects caused by blood spells. It is highly recommended to use the standard spellbook and cast the best elemental spell possible (or Iban Blast), as Surok's mechanics necessitate the use
of the spellbook to counter them.




     The player fights Surok Magis, leader of the Dagon'hai.

Every 7-8 attacks, Surok will launch a special attack:

      Quote                                                                                                        Attack
                    Surok will call in either a Strong Warrior or Agile Warrior and begin to approach you. The player will always deal no damage to them unless casting counter spells beforehand. These spells are
 Fighting you is    Weaken for the Strong Warrior and any binding spell, such as Entangle, for the Agile Warrior before they can be damaged.
beneath me!
                    If the warriors are not killed before they reach you, you will be bound and Surok will cast a spell that deals 45+ damage while also killing the warrior in the process.

                    Surok will throw out a lit explosive, which will deal 45+ damage if ignored or picked up. Quickly castTelekinetic Grab on it, then alchemise it to safely avoid the explosion. (If you use the plug-in
 Magicus ignitus!
                    "No Bad Alchs" turn it off before the fight)
                    Surok will cast 1-4 elemental surges that approach slowly towards you, dealing 45+ damage per surge unless countered. The lower Surok's health, the more surges he casts.

                    They can be countered by casting any offensive spell of the opposite element on the elemental surges (not Surok himself). Air and earth are opposites, as are water and fire. It is strongly
 Witness true       recommended not to use low level spells for this, as they will deal only partial damage to the surges.
sorcery!
                    You do NOT need to wait for your spell's animation to finish before targetting the next surge.

                    The Twinflame staff's passive effect does NOT work against this attack, spells will still need to be cast manually.


If you die, your gravestone will be in the tunnels with the elite black knights and collecting your items will be risky without the disguises. The Dark Squall Robes are always kept on death, so be certain to bring
them to reclaim your items.

After defeating Surok, he will fall to the floor. Use the teleorb on him, then return to White Knights' Castle.

Wrath of Lucien

[edit | edit source]
Items needed: Dark Squall's robes, Strange teleorb, 1 death rune, 1 law rune
Items recommended: Teleport to Falador

Speak to Akrisae, and you will report back on your exploits in the catacombs. He will tell you that with Silif's help, they have managed to locateLucien's base at the western edge of the Wilderness, and that the
heroes will move in once you have visual on Lucien. Your next task is to impersonate Surok, who they believe can contact Lucien directly. Using the robes you stole from Surok's inner base, you will now switch
places with him to find a way to access Lucien's base directly.

When ready, walk into the jail cell, and Akrisae will teleport you back into Surok's inner base. If you didn't take thestrange teleorb (and the runes required to use it) from the desks, climb back down and do so.
Otherwise, activate it whilst standing in the magical circle to teleport into Lucien's camp.

The camp is inhabited by numerous level 128 skeletons and Undead Mages, though they will not be aggressive if the player is still wearingSurok's robes. Run along the north-east path until you are across from
the Chaos Temple, then climb up the ice wall to the east and jump to theledge on the Chaos Temple (this is a safe area and does not count as being in theWilderness).

Skip reading to the next section if you want to avoid spoilers for this cutscene.

A cutscene will play showing Lucien, now with the Staff of Armadyl, casting a powerful spell to raiseUndead Heroes for his army. He will then notice you, see through your disguise, and cast a powerful spell at
you. The first shot will miss, and you will jump away from the second shot, which instead incinerates two elite black knights that are attempting to apprehend you. Seeing you in danger, Hazelmere will call on the
band of heroes to teleport to the chapel and engage Lucien.

Mazchna and Harrallak will draw the undead heroes, while everyone else will engage Lucien.Sloane and Duradel will be instantly killed when they attempt to face Lucien, andHazelmere will cast a barrage of
crystalline spikes towards him, all to no avail. Cyrisus, Ghommal, and Turael, after killing their respective enemies, also join in on the attack, but fail to deal any damage. Lucien will then cast another attack against
the three warriors, incinerating them.

While Hazelmere looks at his seed pod, being no longer usable after he previously used it tosave you, he accepts his fate and is incinerated by Lucien. Satisfied with the devastation, Lucien will then teleport
away, forcing Mazchna and Harrallak to retreat back to Falador. Head back to White Knights' Castle. Teleports will work while above the Chaos Temple.
      The full cutscene of Lucien's slaughter.




      Lucien and his army of undead
      heroes.




      Lucien spots the player, and fires
      a powerful spell towards you.




      The band of heroes, led by
      Hazelmere, make haste to your
      location.




      The heroes arrive not a moment
      sooner.




      Lucien kills Duradel and Sloane.




      Lucien kills Cyrisus, Turael, and
      Ghommal.




      The wise and mighty Hazelmere,
      moments before being reduced
      to ashes.

Into the Chasm
[edit | edit source]
Items needed: Dark Squall's robes, a lit sapphire lantern, sufficient prayer points to cast Bloom
Items recommended: Some means of reaching the Chasm of Tears (ex. a games necklace), 8 filled druid pouches or 3 mort myre fungus to refill it, 7 empty inventory slots. Aspade, hammer (an Imcando
hammer will work), and chisel (all can be acquired in immediate proximity of the quest).




      Movario continues his search in the Chasm of Tears.




      Rock Bottom Orb Locations

Speak to either Idria, Akrisae, or Thaerisk, who apologise for severely underestimating Lucien's strength. Akrisae will then report thatMovario has been spotted entering the Chasm of Tears, and is likely hot on
the trail for the Stone; you will be asked to impersonate Surok and head there to help him with his investigations. Use the games necklace to teleport to Tears of Guthix, then head north (past the minigame) and
climb the rocks to reach Movario.

Upon speaking to him as Surok, he will tell you that he believes the Stone is at the bottom of the chasm. Though he lacks the means to climb all the way down the deep chasm, you will reveal the
                                                                                                                                                                                               light creatures
are capable of doing so with a sapphire lantern, and he will use a light blue spell to draw the creature down into the chasm with you in tow. Click on alight creature to attract it.

Rock bottom

[edit | edit source]
      Extracting elemental blocks from the recesses.

Upon arriving at the bottom of the chasm, you will find yourself on the north-east area of an X-shaped platform.

Search the nearby skeletal remains for the following items: a spade, a hammer, and a chisel.

      On the north-east area, use the spade on the pile of rocks next to the skeleton to uncover a brazier, then use the chisel on it to obtain fire
                                                                                                                                                a orb.
      Go west to the north-west area and use the spade on the lone pile of rocks for anearth orb.
      Go south to the south-west area, and use a chisel on the intact brazier there for anair orb.
      Go east to the south-east area, use a chisel on the brazier there for thewater orb.

Trading Orbs For Blocks, Blocks for Access

[edit | edit source]

Head all the way south to reach the walls shaped as skulls.

      For each skull, examine (or camera zoom) the recess to identify an elemental marking. Use the corresponding element orb on a recess to exchange for an elemental block.
           The 3 lower-level recesses will be randomized for players, but the recess for water block is located 2 levels above the centre skull, and requires climbing to access. This recess appears different but
           behaves the same.

      With all elemental blocks acquired, Unequip your weapon and shield slots and enter all 3 of the lower-level skull nose cavities.
      Crawl to the end, examine (or camera zoom) the mechanism to identify the mechanism's element, and use the corresponding elemental block on each mechanism.
           The 3 lower-level mechanisms will be randomized for players, but the fire block will be used on the top floor.

      Climb back up to the fourth skull (where you received thewater block) and use the fire block on the recessed block.
      Inspect the stone cube, and the recessed block will vanish to reveal an entrance.
      Climb through to reach the Ancient Guthixian Temple.

Dolmens, doors, and druids

[edit | edit source]




      Placing ingredients in exchange for dolmen

The stone table is surrounded by multiple forked paths leading to 8 of 13 possiblestatues, each named after potions. Statue selection and locations are randomized uniquely per player.

      Make your way south to the central chamber where the stone table is found.
      Search the nearby skeleton for a silver sickle (b) and a druid pouch(6).
      You will need between 2 and 18 free inventory spaces. Drop yourspade, chisel, and hammer, re-equip any available item slots to free up inventory.
           To use the bare minimum inventory space (2), you will need to scout each tunnel to identify each statue.
           To minimise time running, you will loot all supplies simultaneously (16-18) before visiting each statue.
      Inspect the green brazier between the table and north entrance for free stamina doses, and return for more.
           This brazier does not have a click limit, and will activate thering of endurance effect and consuming charges if it is equipped.

Acquiring Ingredients

[edit | edit source]

Note that the druids will always drop exactly what is needed to solve all eight puzzles, so there is no risk of receiving unnecessary items or duplicates.

      Use a charged druid pouch on druid spirits, they will drop one exact set of ingredients you need.

Ingredients are only dropped once, and no unnecessary items are dropped. If you fail to pick them up, you will need to leave and return with your own.

      If you have at least 2 more inventory spaces, rinse and repeat until you have either a full inventory or all 16 supplies needed.

Recharging Pouches


[edit | edit source]

With eight spirits required to be freed and six druid pouch charges provided, the player will need to make two additional charges to obtain all the items needed to solve the puzzles.

      With the silver sickle (b) and a druid pouch in your inventory, stand over one of the dead vines scattered all over the tunnels.
      Right-click cast bloom on the silver sickle (b), and pick the Vine flowers which spawn.
      With 3+ Vine flowers in your inventory, right-click fill your druid pouch.

Acquiring Dolmens


[edit | edit source]

      Once you have one or multiple sets of ingredients, find the statue that corresponds to your ingredients.
      Use the two correct ingredients on the statue.
      Upon using the second ingredient, the statue will animate and you will receive a Dolmen.
      If you have no more ingredients, return to the table and use your dolmen on the table.
      If you have more ingredients, continue visiting the statues.

Examine the statues and use the corresponding ingredients on them:

   Keyword                                              Ingredients
Agility                Toadflax +      Toad's legs
Attacking              Guam leaf +     Eye of newt or        Irit leaf +   Eye of newt
Balance                Harralander +     Red spiders' eggs +        Garlic +    Silver dust
Combat                 Harralander +      Goat horn dust
Defence                Ranarr weed +      White berries or        Cadantine +      White berries
Energy                 Avantoe +       Mort myre fungus or         Harralander +     Chocolate dust
Fishing                Avantoe +       Snape grass
Hunting                Avantoe +       Kebbit teeth dust
Magic                  Lantadyme +       Potato cactus
Prayer                 Ranarr weed +       Snape grass
Ranging                Dwarf weed +      Wine of zamorak

Restoration         Snapdragon +         Red spiders' eggs or     Harralander +   Red spiders'
                 eggs
Strength               Tarromin +      Limpwurt root or    Kwuarm +       Limpwurt root

Note: The ingredients to make the super versions of hunter and fishing potions cannot be used for the Hunter and Fishing statues.

       Upon using the final dolmen on the stone table, the huge door will be opened.

       Bank and gear up for the fight in the next section, as there is a particularly hard boss fight coming up which necessitates the use of supplies and multiple combat styles.
            The player will no longer need the dark squall's robes at this point.

The Stone of Jas
[edit | edit source]
Items needed: Sapphire lantern, combat equipment for three attack styles.
Items recommended: Super restore potions, Menaphite remedy, Book of the dead and runes for thralls, food or Saradomin brews

Players will need to prepare for a difficult fight ahead, requiring equipment for all three attack styles, and a means to restore drained stats.Bringing only two attack styles will result in the elemental praying
against both your attack styles in the final phase. The Balance Elemental has negative defence values against crush, heavy ranged, and magic.

Balancing act

[edit | edit source]

       The Balance Elemental takes form.




       The Stone's guardian, the Balance Elemental, appears before you.

When ready, head beyond the huge door and run through the corridor until a cutscene begins. As you discover that theStone of Jas is indeed here, energy begins to coalesce into theBalance Elemental, the
Stone's guardian. You will tell it that Lucien is coming to take the Stone; while the elemental believes you, it still has a task to fulfil and will attack the player.

The Balance Elemental has 750 hitpoints and attacks with all three combat styles. It changes styles after four attacks, then uses a special attack that drains both combat stats and a large chunk of prayer, before
repeating another four attacks. The first of the four attacks will always be a stat-lowering attack using its new combat style before attacking again normally. It also makes use of routefinding to avoid being safe-
spotted in its melee form. The standard attacks have a max hit of 40, while the special attack can hit up to 89.




       The Balance Elemental fights the player.




       A possible tile to hide from the Balance Elemental.

The colour of its head determines its primary combat style.Immediately switch prayers upon the elemental changing appearance to avoid taking heavy and rapid damage; when done correctly, this mitigates all of
the damage dealt. The correct overhead prayer must be active before it starts the animation for the attack. When the elemental reaches lower health thresholds the animation may overlap with additional attacks.
Above 50% HP you have a 2 tick window to react to change in attack style. Below 50% HP you have only 1 tick to react before damage is calculated. Be prepared to switch protection prayers as soon as you see
the elemental change styles. Do not be fooled by the animation resembling a projectile — if the Elemental's head is white, it is still a melee attack.

After reaching certain Hitpoint thresholds, it will begin to speed up its attacks and use protection prayers. The Elemental will not switch protection prayers until you deal a certain amount of damage to it.

Bringing a Menaphite remedy and running behind the pillars to hide from the elemental if a prayer swap is missed is an effective way to restore drained stats.




Appearance




Colour                              Fiery (orange)         Airy (white)   Watery (blue)
Attacks with                           Ranged                 Melee          Magic
Prays against (<550
HP)
              Attack
Health                                                       Mechanics
              speed
<750      6              Standard attacks
<550      5              Standard attacks plus one protection prayer (see table above)
                        Standard attacks plus two protection prayers (mostly vulnerable to its own
<200     2
                        style)

Players should be careful not to get overwhelmed by the fast attack speed and focus on correct defensive prayer switches first before restoring hitpoints and stats. Equipment switches are lower priority until the
Balance Elemental falls below 200 HP. Without equipment switches, you will still deal damage a third of the time while taking no damage (if switching defensive prayers correctly). Offensive prayers are lowest
priority. Once you reach the last phase, the Balance Elemental will protect against 2 attack styles and will not change prayers until taking damage. Therefore, it is necessary to bring all 3 attack styles for this
phase, paying close attention to which style it is vulnerable to. Once damage is dealt, it tends to swap duel prayers each time it switches attack styles, but it will stop prayer swapping if it has not taken damage
recently and continue to switch attack styles. Continue to prioritize your own defensive prayers above all else until you are comfortable with the rhythm of the fight, then begin incorporating equipment swaps to
deal damage until the Balance Elemental is defeated.

If you find yourself getting overwhelmed, an option is to immediately run to the other side of the Stone of Jas when the fight starts, where the player is safe from attacks. After this, attack the Balance Elemental
until it changes its attack style. When its attack style changes, quickly change your overhead Prayer accordingly and run back behind the Stone to sort out the rest. This will give you more time to set up everything
for the next couple of attacks until the Balance Elemental switches attack styles again.

If you die, your gravestone will be placed by Movario and Darve in the Chasm of Tears; you willnot need another sapphire lantern to retrieve your items, but you will need it to return to the bottom.

Facing your demons

[edit | edit source]

Once the elemental is killed, touch the Stone of Jas. This will cause the player to relive memories of the past with other stone-users, such as
                                                                                                                                              V. Movario and Darve will appear, thanking you for bringing them to
the Stone of Jas. Suddenly, Lucien will teleport in and ask Movario why he did not inform him of the discovery, who defends himself by stating that he had just discovered it. Noticing the player, he proceeds to
take the Stone of Jas before summoning two Tormented Demons to attack the player. Idria and the Guardians of Armadyl will then teleport in to assist.

       The vision from the Stone of Jas.




       V touching the Stone of Jas.




       A vision depicting the heroes of
       the Dragonkin Conflicts with the
       Stone.




       Lucien appears to take the
       Stone.




       The Guardians of Armadyl come
       to your aid.

       Lucien teleports the stone away, and summons two tormented demons to finish you off.

The player's stats are temporarily increased to 255 due to touching the Stone of Jas, and stat drains (such assaradomin brews) will not affect the player. Kill off the two tormented demons, fighting them one at a
time. The demons have a fire shield which reduces damage slightly, and can occasionally bind the player before launching fire projectiles around them which can be avoided by walking away from the targeted
tiles, though the Stone of Jas' power means that the player will not have much issue dealing massive damage to them. The demons, like the elemental, make use of routefinding and can hit quite high if their
attacks are not protected against.

If trying to avoid combat XP, you may hide behind the south-western column; the Guardians of Armadyl are capable of defeating the tormented demons without the player's assistance. This can take upwards of
10 minutes, and logging out will reset the fight, so make sure to not get logged out for idling if trying this. Flinching from behind the south-western column is another viable strategy, attacking whenever the demons
begin to ignore you and walk away to gain some distance. If you are simply low on supplies from fighting the Balance Elemental, it is faster to teleport out to restock, as the fight will reset to when the tormented
demons spawned and you will not need to fight the Balance Elemental again. When you return, you will immediately re-enter the fight with both demons likely to be targeting you. If this happens, it can be
extremely difficult to avoid damage as they will each attack you with multiple styles, even at range. To correct this, run as far away from both demons as you can until they are no longer attacking you. After a few
seconds, they will lose aggro and separate, focusing on the other NPCs in the area and giving you a chance to target one at a time.

After killing off the demons, Idria will be amazed at the strength you acquired from touching the Stone of Jas and will offer to teleport you back to the White Knights' Castle. Accept, and speak to the group, who will
be dismayed that Lucien now has the Stone of Jas in his possession. Despite this, they plan to stop him no matter the cost.

The story kin-tinues

[edit | edit source]

If you have completed Dragon Slayer II before completing While Guthix Sleeps, an extra cutscene will play before the quest is completed.Note: the introduction to this cutscene is about a minute long and not
skippable, your account will stay logged in until it completes and the dialogue begins.

Meanwhile, back in the Lithkren Vault, three Dragonkin - Strisath, Sithaph, and Sakirth - will break free from their stasis chambers, noting that Zorgoth is dead and someone has used the Stone, and agree to bring
terror to the mortals who wish to claim its power.

       Meanwhile, in the Lithkren Vault...

Congratulations, quest complete!

Rewards
[edit | edit source]
      5     Quest points
                           experience
           80,000 Thieving
           75,000 Farming experience
           75,000 Herblore experience
          50,000 Hunter experience
      Access to the Ancient Guthixian Temple and tormented demons
      Duradel's notes, obtained from Kuradal, which grants            experience equal to 15x the player's Slayer level when read, as well as the ability to craft theemberlight, scorching bow, and purging staff
                                                              Slayer
      100 death runes, 100 fire runes, 100 coal, and 100 magic logs can be looted from Movario's base
      Elite black armour and Dark Squall robes
      Access to the Black Knight Catacombs
      The broav, if kept

Transcript
[edit | edit source]
 This article on a quest has an associated dialogue page.
 Click here for a transcript of possible conversations encountered throughout the
 quest.
 Click here for a transcript of the quest's journal entry.

Music
[edit | edit source]
                                                                                                     Music
           Name                                        Unlock details
                                                                                                     track
Dangerous Logic             Unlocked upon entering Movario's base
The Route of the
                            Unlocked during the mercenary attack on McGrubor's Wood
Problem
Incarceration               Unlocked during the first interrogation attempt on the shady stranger
Black of Knight             Unlocked upon entering the Black Knight Catacombs
The Route of All Evil       Unlocked during the fight with Surok Magis
The Evil Within             Unlocked during Lucien's slaughter at the Chaos Temple
The Sound of Guthix         Unlocked upon entering the Ancient Guthixian Temple
Temple Desecrated           Unlocked during the fight with the Balance Elemental
                            Unlocked during the epilogue if Dragon Slayer II has been
The Kin
                            completed

Gallery
[edit | edit source]


      The key visual for the quest.




            The key visual for the quest.




       The logo for the quest
      used in social media and
             marketing.




       Concept art of Lucien's Mahjarrat form,
                   by Mod Grub.




          Lucien's reworked Mahjarrat
            model, by Mod Skylark.
        Concept arts for the weapons created
          from items dropped by tormented
               demons, by Mod Grub.




         The login background
      commemorating the quest upon
               release.




           The full login background
        commemorating the quest upon
        release, without the main menu
                     overlay.
       The music used
         for the login
       screen of While
        Guthix Sleeps

Changes
[edit | edit source]
     Date                                                                                                        Changes

                       Texts and dialogues throughout the quest have been adjusted to bring it in line with the quest inRuneScape 2.
                       A chest has been added to Movario's base that contains the runes players may need to open theold battered door.
                       Thaerisk will now give players one snapdragon seed for free, rather than charging roughly half theGrand Exchange value of the seed.
24 July 2024
                       Akrisae will now offer a one-time teleport toIce Mountain upon asking you to investigate Silif's whereabouts, and also remind you that a disguise is needed to enterBlack Knights' Fortress.
(Update)
                       Teleporting using the strange teleorb can now use runes from a rune pouch.
                       When placing herblore ingredients on statues within the Ancient Guthixian Temple, the corresponding alternate ingredients will now be returned to you; for example, placing a herb on a statue
                       that already has one will give the initial herb back.

                HOTFIX

                       Multiple changes were made to increase the quest's difficulty in order to make it comparable to other Grandmaster quests:
                             Surok Magis
                                    Players no longer heal off of Surok when usingblood spells.
                                    Surok's elemental surge attack no longer has its damage reduced by Protect from Magic.
11 July 2024
                             Balance Elemental
                                    The Balance Elemental's maximum hit was drastically increased.
                                    The Balance Elemental's stat-lowering attack now also drains prayer points.
                                    The Balance Elemental now requires all three combat styles to be defeated, as it will no longer change its protection prayers after a certain amount of time.
                       Surok's lit explosives can now be alchemised regardless of whether or not the alchemy untradeable item warning is on.



Developers
[edit | edit source]

Original:

      Developer: Mod Tytn
      Lead Design Editor: Mod Mark
      Second Developers: Paul Gower, John H
      Assistant Developers: Mod Liono, Mod Tim, Mod Newmatic, Mod Maz
      Additional Writing: Mod John A, Luke M, Mod Rowley
      Technical Support: Mod Ash, Mod Benny, Mod Chihiro
      Code Review: Mod John A, Mod Roderick, Mod Newmatic
      Lead Graphics Artist: James W
      Graphics: Matthew S, Mod Brass, Mod Alex, Matthew M, Mod Paul B, Jeff K, Wayne M, Mod Stead, Kavi M, Daniel J, Mod GiuG
      Quality Assurance: Daniel O'R, Dan G, Mod James H, Florian P
      Editorial: Mod Rowley, Mod Osborne, Luke M, Veronika H
      German Translation: Gesine P
      QuestHelp: Katie B
      Audio: Mod Bond

Historical
[edit | edit source]
Main article: /Historical

While Guthix Sleeps was originally released inRuneScape 2 on 26 November 2008, more than a year after theAugust 2007 archive of RuneScape that Old School was built off of. Though the quest is largely the
same as the original, numerous changes were made to the lore, graphics, gameplay, music, and rewards.

Trivia
[edit | edit source]

      The addition of While Guthix Sleeps to Old School RuneScape was first hinted at in the February 2022 Gielinor Gazette.
      The assassin's act of teleporting to the player before exclaiming "Nothing personal, adventurer!" is a reference toa copypasta.
      Lucien's line, "Look upon my works and despair!" is a direct reference to the poemOzymandias by Percy Bysshe Shelley.
      After the completion of the quest, the memorial statues are put up at several spots in remembrance of them. Most of these statues can be found on these specific locations:
            Turael and Duradel - at the entrance of theSlayer Tower.
            Ghommal and Sloane - at the entrance to theWarriors' Guild.
            Cyrisus - at the entrance to theHeroes' Guild.
            Hazelmere - his statue next to Argento is replaced.
            Turael, Cyrisus, Duradel, Ghommal, Hazelmere and Sloane - in theFalador Park, next to the pond.
      After the quest, new replacement NPCs appear since Lucien killed most of the team of warriors organised to stop him in the Wilderness, with exception for Hazelmere or Cyrisus.
            Turael → Aya
       Duradel → Kuradal
       Ghommal → Laidee Gnonock
       Sloane → Yadech Strongarm
       Mazchna → Achtryn (only during the quest)

  v
                                 While Guthix Sleeps
  e




               Guardian of Armadyl (messenger)

                 Hunting expert
            Wild broav

                  Khazard Launderer

                Betty

                  Shady stranger

                  Suspicious outsider

                  Druid spirit

                  Balance Elemental

                   V

               Robert the Strong

                Camorra

                  Tristan

               Aivas



                                 Ivy Sophista

                                 Thaerisk

                                 Idria

                                 Guardian of Armadyl
        Alliance

                                 Akrisae

                                 Silif

                              Druid (super truth serum)

                              Druid (enriched snapdragon patch)



                               Duradel

                                  Hazelmere (hat)

                                  Mazchna

                                  Turael
         Heroes
                                 Ghommal

                                 Harrallak Menarous

                                 Sloane

                                  Cyrisus
NPCs


                                 Lucien

                                 Dark Squall

                                  Movario

                                 Darve

                                 Assassin

                                 Mercenary axeman

                                 Mercenary mage

        Enemies                  Elite Khazard Guard

                               Elite Black Knight

                                 Elite Dark Mage

                                 Elite Dark Ranger

                                 Elite Dark Warrior

                               Surok Magis (Agile Warrior) (Strong Warrior)
                            Elite Black Knight (Guard)
                            Undead Mage
                            Skeleton
                            Undead Hero
                            Tormented Demon
            Sithaph
Dragonkin
            Sakirth

            Strisath
                   Armadyl communiqué
                    Broav (unconscious)
                    Dirty shirt

                    Vine flower

                    Duradel's notes

                    Grimy note
                   Lit explosive



                                                  Movario's notes (volume 1)
                                                  Movario's notes (volume 2)

                                                 Waste-paper basket
                 Movario's base                  Ruby key
                                                 Notes on pressure
                                                Weight (1kg)
                                                Weight (2kg)
                                                 Weight (5kg)



                                                 Teleorb

                                                Truth serum
                                                 Rose-tinted lens
               Spy interrogation                Enriched snapdragon seed
                                                 Enriched snapdragon

                                                Super truth serum

                                                  Suspect sketch



                                                  Cell key
                                                Strange teleorb

                                                Elite black full helm
                                                  Elite black platebody

            Black Knight Catacombs              Elite black platelegs

 Items                                           Dark squall hood
                                                  Dark squall robe top

                                                Dark squall robe bottom

                                                 Silif




                                                                        Air

                                                                        Water
                                          Elemental blocks
                                                                        Earth

                                                                        Fire



                                                                        Agility
                                                                        Energy
                                                                        Restoration
            Ancient Guthixian Temple                                    Attack
                                                                        Strength
                                                                        Defence
                                             Dolmens                    Combat
                                                                        Ranged
                                                                        Prayer
                                                                        Hunter
                                                                        Fishing
                                                                        Magic
                                                                        Balance




                Movario's base
                Black Knight Catacombs
Locations
                Lucien's camp
                Ancient Guthixian Temple
                   Dangerous Logic
                   The Route of the Problem
                   Incarceration
                   Black of Knight
  Music            The Route of All Evil
                   The Evil Within
                   The Sound of Guthix
                   Temple Desecrated
                   The Kin


                   Quick guide
                   Transcript
                   Journal
 Related
                   Stone of Jas
                   Crux Eqal
                   Guardians of Armadyl

Retrieved from "https://oldschool.runescape.wiki/w/While_Guthix_Sleeps?oldid=15154097"
Categories:

     Quests
     Members' quests
     Grandmaster quests
     While Guthix Sleeps
     Backported and extracted content

Hidden categories:

     Unknown start requirement status
     Pages with unsourced statements
     Pages with maps

Navigation menu
Personal tools

     Create account
     Log in

Namespaces

     Article
     Discussion

   British English

Views

     Read
     Edit
     Edit source
     History

   More

Search the OSRS Wiki

 Search

Discord

     Discord

Navigation

     Main page
     About us
     Random page
     Contact us
     Donate

Recent changes

Demonic Pacts League/Guide/Prayer

18m ago - Elaine

Woodsman (Demonic Pacts League)

35m ago - Meune

Conniving Clues

36m ago - Meune

Demonic Pacts League/Relics

40m ago - Wolaznik

Show more...

Guides

     Recent updates
     List of quests
     Achievement diaries
     Combat achievements
     Skill training
     Money making
     Calculators
     DPS calculator
     New player guide

Community

     User help
     Active discussions
     Policies

More RuneScape
   RuneScape Wiki
   RSC Wiki
   Dragonwilds Wiki

Tools

   What links here
   Related changes
   Printable version
   Permanent link
   Page information
   Special pages
   New files
   View buckets

   This page was last modified on 23 March 2026, at 10:04.
   Content on this site is licensed under CC BY-NC-SA 3.0; additional terms apply.
   RuneScape and RuneScape Old School are the trademarks of Jagex Limited and are used with the permission of Jagex.

   Privacy policy
   About the Old School RuneScape Wiki
   Disclaimers
   Terms of Use
   Contact Weird Gloop
   Mobile view
